The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Church and the Census, by James Skinner


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Church and the Census
       A Tract for the Times


Author: James Skinner



Release Date: March 20, 2021  [eBook #64877]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHURCH AND THE CENSUS***


Transcribed from the 1860 Joseph Masters edition by David Price.  Many
thanks to the British Library for making their copy available.

                          A TRACT FOR THE TIMES.

                                * * * * *





                                THE CHURCH
                                   AND
                               THE CENSUS.


                                * * * * *

                                  BY THE
                         REV. JAMES SKINNER, M.A.

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
                    JOSEPH MASTERS, ALDERSGATE STREET,
                           AND NEW BOND STREET.

                                 MDCCCLX.

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
                    PRINTED BY JOSEPH MASTERS AND CO.,
                            ALDERSGATE STREET.

                                * * * * *




THE CHURCH AND THE CENSUS.


I DESIRE to say what follows, in all earnestness, to my fellow-countrymen
who have been, through GOD’S goodness, baptized into the Church of
England.  I shall be thankful, also, if others will patiently consider
what is here set down.

There can be no question that, in old times, GOD was pleased to set up a
visible token, whereby the world might be convinced of His power and
love.  And this token was also a witness to GOD’S Truth.  No one doubts
that the Jewish Church and nation were the witnesses of GOD; and that
they were His witnesses by His own express appointment.  It is equally
allowed, on all hands, that the Jewish Church and nation failed in their
witness.  They failed—not because the need of witnessing had been taken
away; or their authority to witness had been loosened.  But they failed,
because, having the power of choice free—to stand by GOD or to desert
Him, they chose to desert Him.  They failed, because they chose to blind
themselves to the need of witnessing.  They failed, because they chose to
set at nought that authority to witness with which they had been clothed.
GOD’S law of always having His witness did not fail.  The very failure of
the Jewish Church and nation, in the place of witness, _was_ a witness.
The Jewish Church and nation could desert its place of witness.  It could
prefer its own will to GOD’S will.  It could prefer the will of the
people to the will of GOD.  It could prefer the kingdom of this world to
the kingdom of Heaven.  And it _did_ prefer its own will, and the will of
the people, and the kingdom of this world.

Look at the prophecy of Hosea, and what is there said of all Israel in
the name of Ephraim.  Read the seventh chapter.  The Prophet is reproving
the sins of the princes, and the great men of Israel.  “All their kings
are fallen.”  The flame of civil discord has spread, and dried up the
sources of legitimate authority among them.  An anarchy of eleven years,
after the death of Jeroboam II., has terminated in the assassination of
Zachariah and his successors Shallum and Pekahiah.  “And yet there is
none among them that calleth unto Me,” saith the LORD.

And then, he denounces judgment against the people in the mass, for their
hypocrisy and unfaithfulness.  Whereas, by GOD’S institution, they were a
peculiar people,—witnesses for GOD, and separate from the world, “they
have mixed themselves among the people,”—that is, among the idolaters of
the land,—they are “as a cake not turned,” as a cake baked only on one
side; serving GOD by halves, halting between two masters; worshipping GOD
a little, and worshipping idols a little, and worshipping nothing much.
And so, as a consequence, what must have followed, _did_ follow.  The
Syrians, in the time of Jehoahaz, reduced them to great straits.  They
had but fifty horsemen and ten chariots, and ten thousand footmen. {5}
They were “made like the dust by threshing.”  Shortly after, in the days
of Menahem, they became tributaries to Pul, king of Assyria. {6}  And at
length they were carried away captive bodily by Shalmaneser.

Now, all this has a forcible application to a spiritual state of things,
and sets forth the condition of the Church in the world, as at other
times, so especially at this time in which we live.

Ephraim is the witness of GOD—testifying GOD’S Truth,—bearing GOD’S
commission—appointed in the world to win and attract the people,—to draw
them upward, far above worldly measures of things to the divine measure
of things—to the things which shall be in the eternal Future, and to the
fixed and unchangeable will of GOD, on which that eternal Future stands.
But “Ephraim hath mixed himself” with the people,—he has “learned their
inventions,”—he has adapted his witness to their demands,—he has lowered
his standard of GOD’S appointment to the people’s standard of human
construction.  So that GOD’S teaching and man’s teaching have become
confused and indifferently accepted, and they who have fallen into grave
errors of faith are in no sense differently esteemed from those who have
maintained the truth as revealed by GOD, and as witnessed by the Church
in every land, in every age, by every tongue.

And so, the spiritual Ephraim, who was set up for a witness to the truth,
has become “a cake not turned,” a half-equipped soldier in the fight,
with but half a heart to his Master’s service.

What is the occasion which now presses?  While many of us are praising
GOD in grateful love for His unspeakable mercy in vouchsafing us His
Truth—His determinate and fixed Truth—in which alone souls are saved—His
Truth, as divinely committed to the Church “the pillar and ground of the
Truth,”—and handed down from age to age in every land,—His Truth as
mercifully retained and maintained in the Prayer Book of the Church of
England,—set forth with categorical precision in the three Creeds of
universal Christendom, and expanded and applied in the offices of Holy
Baptism and the Communion of the Body and Blood of CHRIST—while we are
keeping solemn festival to the Glory of GOD, and the power of His Truth,
the “religious world” is exciting itself with vexing hopes and fears
about the decennial Census which the State is about to take of the
religious condition of the country.

I do not believe that this question excites churchmen, or that they care,
except as a matter of political justice, what becomes of it.  For
themselves they know what they are, and where they stand, and in Whom
they trust.  And they are “ready always to give an answer to every man
that asketh them a reason of the hope that is in them.”  With no
“uncertain sound,” or doubting heart, but with plainness and boldness, as
Christian men and women, “standing fast in one spirit, with one mind
striving together for the faith of the Gospel, and nothing terrified by
their adversaries.” {8}

But it is a question full of importance, because of the evidence which it
draws out of the condition of men’s minds among whom we live, and because
of the lesson which that evidence reads to ourselves.

I do not enter upon the question whether it is right or wrong for the
state to ask people about their religion.  My own conviction is that,
under the distracting circumstances of religion in this country, it would
be better and wiser for the state to abstain.  And yet in common sense
the state may as well demand information as to my religious profession,
as in respect of my age or worldly calling.  But the question having been
raised, what is this evidence which it has brought to light, and which I
say is so grave in its results?  There is a vehement, almost a
_passionate_ resistance of the proposition, that men should give an
account of their faith.

It is true that JESUS CHRIST, the very Saviour and Redeemer of our souls,
has said, “Whosoever shall confess Me _before men_, him will I confess
also before My FATHER which is in heaven; and whosoever shall deny Me
_before men_, him will I also deny before My FATHER which is in heaven.”
{9a}  But people on all sides are saying, “not so—not before
men,—religion is a private and secret matter between GOD and me.”

It is true that holy David declared that “he would _speak_ even before
kings and not be ashamed,” {9b} that S. John Baptist “confessed and
denied not, but confessed;” {9c} that S. Paul, for himself, “continued
_witnessing_ to small and great,” {10a} and in the name of all Christians
laid it down that “we believe and _therefore speak_,” {10b} and that
“every _tongue_ should confess.” {10c}  But people on all sides are
saying, “Not so—not confess, not witness, not speak,—any other test you
please; number us as we sit here or stand there; but do not ask us to
speak.  We prefer to take our place with the ‘chief rulers who believed,
but did not confess;’—we believe, but do not ask us to confess.”

And this resistance has two sides—one political, and the other
quasi-religious.

Political men resist, because they say the Church of England holds them,
and yet does _not_ hold them.  It holds them politically, gives them, if
they demand it, baptism, or communion, or churching, or burial.  Yet it
does _not_ hold them because they object to her services, and usages, and
prefer preachers of their own, and _other_ doctrines than hers.  “We are
Churchmen,” say these people, “in one sense, though not in another; and
therefore we prefer not to define ourselves at all.  We go to ‘meeting,’
but we have not parted final company with the Church.  And as
excommunication can alone sever the bond between us, we are glad that
excommunication is now unknown.”

Such is one side of the opposition to the notion of defining their faith.
How shall they define it?  Once perhaps when the Catechism was fresh upon
the soft and docile mind of their childhood they might have been able,
but now that is a mere reminiscence.  They know not to-day what they may
believe to-morrow.  Meantime they will hold on to the Church as to a
secular institution, and do what they can to secularize it.  It will
become more useful and less mischievous in their opinion, just as men
cease to regard it as a “witness” for the glory of GOD, and a training
school for the salvation of souls.

The other side of the same opposition has more appearance of religious
feeling about it.  Men object to define their faith, because really and
conscientiously they _have_ no faith which they _can_ define.  “False
shame,” “procrastination,” “self-distrust in honourable minds,” (as it
has been mischievously called, {11}) “consciousness of imperfection,”
such are the pleas with which they indulgently flatter themselves.  They
are not yet ripe for any “visible Church;” so they ignorantly and
complacently express it; they mean to wait; they are not unchristian
because they dare not make choice of a denomination _yet_.  Surely not.
By and by will be time enough.  They will make a profession some day
though not now.

When I hear on every side as I mix with my fellow men, and read in every
newspaper, as I strive to note down the voice of the public press as it
gains upon the popular mind, such sentiments as these, I am bound to say
that if this be not spiritually the reproduction of the picture of
Ephraim, as Hosea drew it in the days of Israel’s apostasy, and as such,
if it be not the accomplishment among ourselves of a prophetic
announcement which spiritually concerned the Church of CHRIST, I know not
where to find a prophecy fulfilled.  “Ephraim he hath mixed himself among
the people: Ephraim is a cake not turned.  Strangers have devoured his
strength, and he knoweth it not; yea, grey hairs are here and there upon
him; yet he knoweth not.” {12}

I will now presume to say something in the presence of this calamity
which afflicts the Church of CHRIST in England.

I.  First, I will say that as Truth is one and indivisible, so your faith
as English Churchmen, with the Cross of CHRIST upon your foreheads,—and
the bond of the “Apostles’ doctrine and fellowship” in your hearts,—and
the Prayer Book with its Catholic witness in your hands, is fixed, and
easily defined.

It is fixed, because otherwise it could not be the Truth.  And you
possess that which is fixed, because otherwise that which you possess
could not be true.  The Church of GOD is “the pillar and ground of the
Truth;” {13} and you have the Truth from the Church of GOD.

The Church of GOD does not create the Truth.  The Church of GOD does not
even give force and power to the Truth.  But the Church of GOD is the
depositary of the Truth.  The Church of GOD has the Truth to keep, and to
maintain, and to hand down.  The Church of GOD is the orb, out of which
the glorious light of the Truth shines and overspreads the earth.  The
Church of GOD is the candlestick which holds the light.  The Church of
GOD is the pillar on which the proclamation of the Truth is written, and
held up and heralded through the world.  You learn truth from that
pillar.  And that pillar is the Church of GOD?

What Church of GOD?  The one Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church of GOD.
The same which delivered the “decrees of the Apostles and elders at
Jerusalem:” {14} the same which confounded Arius at Nicæa: the same which
overwhelmed Nestorius at Ephesus: the same which silenced Macedonius at
Constantinople: the same which vanquished Eutyches at Chalcedon:—the one
Holy Church throughout the world.

2.  Next, I desire to lay down this—that, contrary to what the advocates
of a religious census seem to imply—truth and numbers have no relation
one to the other, unless it be that truth is with the few.  The greatest
number of mankind is yet in darkness and error; as S. John says, “the
world lieth in wickedness.”

All GOD’S Word testifies that, compared with the many who forsake the
truth, or who never accept it, or who deny it and lose its fruits, those
who receive it, and live by it, and enter into its reward, are few.  Of
all the world at the time of the Flood only eight persons were worthy to
be rescued.  Among all the guilty families in the cities of the plain,
only Lot’s escaped destruction.  Of all the six hundred thousand Hebrews
delivered out of Egypt, though blessed with the same miracles, conducted
by the same Guide, and nourished by the same Manna, two only entered the
promised land.  In the taking of Jericho, of all the houses in the city
only the harlot Rahab’s was spared.  Of all the thirty and two thousand
soldiers of Gideon, but three hundred were found worthy to contend for
the LORD.  And so, of all those olive berries and clusters of grapes set
forth by the Prophet to describe the called of GOD,—there shall be saved
only “as the shaking of the olive tree, and as the gleaning grapes, when
the vintage is done.” {15}

Therefore Religion is not for show, but for reality.  GOD is for Truth,
and not for numbers.  And they who are truly wise must be content, as the
Apostles of old were content, to have numbers against them, if so it be,
and to pass in turn through good and evil report, in the honest and
simple defence of what is true.

This facing of the Truth against numbers is a necessity.  And if you seek
to shun it, you are sure nevertheless to encounter it; and with all the
more roughness, for your efforts to escape it.  If you side with the
multitude, you will probably be magnified by those who are in the wrong.
But you will hardly escape being censured by those who are in the right.
And their commendation, if it makes less noise, has more value.

You must not be dismayed, therefore, because the world is against you.
You must not begin a course of action because it is popular; nor must you
abandon a course of action because it is decried.  Look to what pleases
GOD, not to what will please the multitude.  And then you will do what is
right.  You will be wise for GOD.  And GOD is over all.

3.  Once more.  No earnest mind can entertain the thought of what is
passing among us, without feeling that these are sifting times.  Times of
division, when errors abound, are always times of sifting; times in which
GOD is trying what men are made of; whether they are corn or chaff, gold
or dross, wheat or tares.

Ephraim is “a cake not turned.”  But who are guilty?  “I will sift the
House of Israel,” saith the LORD, “as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet
shall not the least grain fall upon the earth.”  {17a}  This is the one
comfort in the midst of so much sorrow.  Whosoever is true grain, shall
not be lost.  See to it, then, that each soul among you is _true grain_.

GOD is sifting your sincerity by the errors which He suffers to compass
you about.  “I hear there are divisions among you, and I believe it,”
says the Apostle, “for there _must_ be heresies among you, that they
which are approved may be made manifest.” {17b}  And your stability He is
sifting—whether or not you are as Reuben, “unstable as water,” weak, and
soft, and yielding, and inconstant.  And your zeal, and your knowledge,
and your love,—He is sifting all these, in this your day of probation.

You have had great gifts at GOD’S Hand, unspeakable opportunities of
knowing Him and His Truth—the Word of GOD, the witness of the Church, and
the “Spirit leading you into all Truth” through the ordained means of
grace—through Sacraments and Prayer.  How is it with you?  Are you yet
“men” in knowledge, with the “full assurance of understanding to the
acknowledgment of the mystery of GOD, and of the FATHER, and of CHRIST,
in Whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.” {18a}  Or are
you “children in understanding,” “tossed to and fro and carried about
with every wind of doctrine by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness
whereby they lie in wait to deceive?” {18b}

Now is the test of your weakness or of your strength.  Now it will be
seen _who_ is possessed by that enervated and timid spirit which inspires
so many faltering hearts, and directs so many enfeebled wills, in this
day of conflict for the Church of GOD.

And, above all, your love is being sifted.  Is your hold upon the Church
and her teaching “rooted and grounded in love?”  GOD is trying your
_love_—your love to Himself, to CHRIST, to the Truth.  The head is not a
casket in which Truth can safely lie enshrined.  It is soon stolen from
thence.  But, if you have lodged it in the heart, and embedded it there
in folds of love, men may take out your heart, but out of your heart they
cannot take the Truth.

It is for want of love that so many men among us are cowards,—that so
much is sacrificed to the first appearance of danger,—that so much is
offered up to expediency, to popularity, to success.  The world is a
worshipper of success.  But the world has no love for the Truth.  The
world knows nothing of the blessed joy of undergoing persecution and
danger, and making ventures, for the Truth’s sake.  And so, as “Ephraim
has mixed himself” with the world, he is as “a cake not turned,” and
“strangers have devoured his strength,” in this age of concession and
falling away.

But what says “He Who sitteth upon the throne?”  “He that overcometh
shall inherit all things.” {19}  But the “fearful” or cowardly, (the
_δειλοὶ_,) and the unfaithful or “unbelieving” (the _ἄπιστοι_,) the
deserters who fall off from want of faith and patience, what of them?
“they shall have their part with murderers, and whore-mongers, and
idolaters, and liars, in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone,
which is the second death.” {20a}

And what says the Apostle?  When love is perfect {20b} then we have
“boldness in the _crisis_,” or judgment, or trial, of faith; and “love
casts out fear.”  And fear is the parent of all unlawful concessions.

We owe the Truth an external service as well as an internal devotion.
And they have no love for the Truth who withhold an external service.
The faith of the heart will no more avail without the confession of the
mouth, than the confession of the mouth will avail without the faith of
the heart.

If it be enough for CHRIST that you know Him, though you confess Him not
before men, it will also be enough for you that He knows you, though, at
the last, He confess you not before men.  It is not enough to say, “I
hold the Truth in my heart, but I am silent before the world.”  And,
therefore, CHRIST does _not_ say, “he that confesseth Me in his heart;”
but CHRIST says, “he that confesseth Me _before men_.”  They are vital
words, these words of CHRIST.  Lay them up in your hearts, and live by
them.  Hear them at length.  “Whosoever shall confess Me before men, him
will I confess also before My FATHER Which is in Heaven.  But whosoever
shall deny Me before men, him will I also deny before My FATHER Which is
in Heaven.  Think not that I am come to send peace on earth, I came not
to send peace but a sword.  For I am come to set a man at variance
against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the
daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law, and a man’s foes shall be they
of his own household.  He that loveth father or mother more than Me is
not worthy of Me; and he that loveth son or daughter more than Me is not
worthy of Me.  And he that taketh not his cross and followeth after Me is
not worthy of Me.  He that findeth his life shall lose it, and he that
loseth his life for My sake shall find it.” {21}




POSTSCRIPT.


WHILE these pages are passing through the press, the Government has
yielded the point at issue.  It has yielded, against its own convictions.
It has yielded to pressure,—and to pressure from those whom it considers
wrong-headed, and unreasonable, and unjust.

The Government believed and declared that it was fair, and right, and
just, and necessary “for legislative purposes,” that the people of
England should _confess_ the religious profession which they make—each
man his own.  The Government still believes in the fairness, and justice,
and necessity of such a declaration.  But, because some persons object to
it, on the ground that no man ought to be asked what his religion is, or
whether he has any religion at all, and because those persons have
political influence, the Government has yielded its convictions to those
persons.

The Government loves its convictions a little.  It loves political
influence much.  And so, this has come out clear—whatever is just, and
fair, and right, and even necessary for “legislative purposes,” has no
chance of prevailing in the counsels of Government, unless, _first_, the
political influence of the Government shall be secured.  If on the side
of injustice, and unfairness, and the entanglement and perversion of
legislation, there should be political influence, that will be the side
of the Government.  Evil consequences in the future are nothing.  Present
place and present power are everything.

I think this ought to be a lesson to Churchmen not to put faith in
Governments.  The Church can never lose by any measures which are just,
and fair, and straightforward, and open.  And, therefore, the Church had
nothing to lose from the “religious profession” clause of the Census
Bill.  But as Governments do not bind themselves to keep their faith, and
are always ready to sacrifice their convictions of justice to their lust
of power, the Church must have no trust in Governments.

The object of this tract is not affected by the weak and pitiful conduct
of the Government.  It never was my object to defend the “religious
profession” clause.  I have said that, considering the religious
distractions of this country, I think it would be wiser for the
Government to leave the religious profession of the people alone.  And I
say so still.  Never to have proposed a Census of religious opinions at
all would have been wise.  But, to have proposed it—to have stoutly
maintained the justice of it—to have asserted the necessity of it for
equitable legislation,—and then, to have withdrawn it to satisfy an
unreasoning handful of Dissenters, who make themselves heard in the House
of Commons, is not to be characterized by any negative form of judgment.
This is not simply want of wisdom.  It is more like that moral imbecility
which, in men whom GOD has burdened with a high trust, is really a crime.

The object of this tract remains.  And therefore, notwithstanding the
course which the Government has taken, I send it forth to effect that
object, as opportunity shall be found.  I ask my countrymen and
countrywomen—Christian men and women—simply to consider, as in the
presence of GOD, these two appalling facts, which the discussion of the
Census Bill has forced to the surface, in this day of _Crisis_ for the
Truth.

1.  That thousands of baptized souls in England are content to believe
nothing in particular.

2.  That thousands more who protest that they _do_ believe something in
particular, protest also that they cannot “confess” that something
“before men.”

                                * * * * *

         _Price_ 2_d._, _or_ 10_s._ _per_ 100 _for distribution_.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

           JOSEPH MASTERS AND CO., PRINTERS, ALDERSGATE STREET.




FOOTNOTES.


{5}  2 Kings xiii. 7.

{6}  2 Kings xv. 19.

{8}  Phil. i. 27, 28.

{9a}  S. Matt. x. 32.

{9b}  Ps. cxix. 46.

{9c}  S. John i. 20.

{10a}  Acts xxvi. 22.

{10b}  2 Cor. iv. 13.

{10c}  Phil. ii. 11.

{11}  See _Daily News_ of May 11, 1860.

{12}  Hosea vii. 9.

{13}  1 Tim. iii. 15.

{14}  Acts xv.

{15}  Isa. xxiv. 13.

{17a}  Amos ix. 9.

{17b}  1 Cor. xi. 19.

{18a}  Col. ii. 2.

{18b}  Eph. iv. 14.

{19}  Rev. xxi. 7.

{20a}  Rev. xxi. 8.

{20b}  1 S. John iv. 17, 18.

{21}  S. Matt. x. 32–39.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHURCH AND THE CENSUS***


******* This file should be named 64877-0.txt or 64877-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/4/8/7/64877


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

